---
layout: page
title: Publications
permalink: /publications/
---

# JOURNAL ARTICLES

#### Oral microbial signatures associated with age and frailty in Canadian adults.
[Link to paper](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-60409-8) / [Link to preprint](https://www.researchsquare.com/article/rs-3760138/v1)<br>
DeClercq, V., **Wright, R.**, Nearing, J. & Langille, M. (2024) *Sci. Rep.* <br>
**Contribution:** data analysis, writing and editing of the manuscript.<br>
<details>
  <summary>Abstract</summary>
  This study aimed to assess the association between the oral microbiome, age, and frailty. Data and saliva samples were obtained from male and female participants aged 35–70 years (n = 1357). Saliva samples were analysed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing and differences in microbial diversity and community compositions were examined in relation to chronological age and the frailty index (FI). Most alpha diversity measures (Richness, Shannon Diversity, Faith’s Phylogenetic Diversity) showed an inverse association with frailty, whereas a positive association was observed with age and Shannon Diversity and Evenness. A further sex-stratified analysis revealed differences in measures of microbial diversity and composition. Multiple genera were detected as significantly differentially abundant with increasing frailty and age by at least two methods. With age, the relative abundance of Veillonella was reduced in both males and females, whereas increases in Corynebacterium appeared specific to males and Aggregatibacter, Fusobacterium, Neisseria, Stomatobaculum, and Porphyromonas specific to females. Beta diversity was significantly associated with multiple mental health components of the FI. This study shows age and frailty are differentially associated with measures of microbial diversity and composition, suggesting the oral microbiome may be a useful indicator of increased risk of frailty or a potential target for improving health in ageing adults.
</details>
<br>
#### Microbial hitchhikers harbouring antimicrobial-resistance genes in the riverine plastisphere.
[Link to paper](https://microbiomejournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40168-023-01662-3) / [Link to preprint](https://www.researchsquare.com/article/rs-2886255/v1)<br>
Zadjelovic, V., **Wright, R.**, Borsetto, C., Jeannelle Quartey, Tyler N. Cairns, Langille, M., Quilliam, R., Christie-Oleza, J. & Wellington, E. (2023)  *Microbiome.*<br>
**Contribution:** all data analysis and figure generation; writing and editing of the manuscript.<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
<b>Background</b><br>
The widespread nature of plastic pollution has given rise to wide scientific and social concern regarding the capacity of these materials to serve as vectors for pathogenic bacteria and reservoirs for Antimicrobial Resistance Genes (ARG). In- and ex-situ incubations were used to characterise the riverine plastisphere taxonomically and functionally in order to determine whether antibiotics within the water influenced the ARG profiles in these microbiomes and how these compared to those on natural surfaces such as wood and their planktonic counterparts.<br>
<br>
<b>Results</b><br>
We show that plastics support a taxonomically distinct microbiome containing potential pathogens and ARGs. While the plastisphere was similar to those biofilms that grew on wood, they were distinct from the surrounding water microbiome. Hence, whilst potential opportunistic pathogens (i.e. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter and Aeromonas) and ARG subtypes (i.e. those that confer resistance to macrolides/lincosamides, rifamycin, sulfonamides, disinfecting agents and glycopeptides) were predominant in all surface-related microbiomes, especially on weathered plastics, a completely different set of potential pathogens (i.e. Escherichia, Salmonella, Klebsiella and Streptococcus) and ARGs (i.e. aminoglycosides, tetracycline, aminocoumarin, fluoroquinolones, nitroimidazole, oxazolidinone and fosfomycin) dominated in the planktonic compartment. Our genome-centric analysis allowed the assembly of 215 Metagenome Assembled Genomes (MAGs), linking ARGs and other virulence-related genes to their host. Interestingly, a MAG belonging to Escherichia –that clearly predominated in water– harboured more ARGs and virulence factors than any other MAG, emphasising the potential virulent nature of these pathogenic-related groups. Finally, ex-situ incubations using environmentally-relevant concentrations of antibiotics increased the prevalence of their corresponding ARGs, but different riverine compartments –including plastispheres– were affected differently by each antibiotic.<br>
<br>
<b>Conclusions</b><br>
Our results provide insights into the capacity of the riverine plastisphere to harbour a distinct set of potentially pathogenic bacteria and function as a reservoir of ARGs. The environmental impact that plastics pose if they act as a reservoir for either pathogenic bacteria or ARGs is aggravated by the persistence of plastics in the environment due to their recalcitrance and buoyancy. Nevertheless, the high similarities with microbiomes growing on natural co-occurring materials and even more worrisome microbiome observed in the surrounding water highlights the urgent need to integrate the analysis of all environmental compartments when assessing risks and exposure to pathogens and ARGs in anthropogenically-impacted ecosystems.<br>
</details>
<br>
#### Assessing the impact of chronic and acute plastic pollution from construction activities and other anthropogenic sources: A case study from the coast of Antofogasta, Chile.
[Link to paper](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2023.115510) / [Link to preprint](http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4489230)<br>
Zadjelovic, V., **Wright, R.**, Walker, T., Avalos, V., Marîn, P., Ushak, S., Christie-Oleza, J. & Riquelme, C. (2023) *Mar. Poll. Bull.*<br>
**Contribution:** writing and editing of the manuscript.<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
Plastic pollution is a critical environmental issue with far-reaching and not yet fully explored consequences. This study uncovered a significant source of plastic contamination arising from improper application and management of expanded polystyrene (EPS) utilised as expansion joints at a construction site near the coast of Antofagasta, Chile. Through meticulous field observations and calculations, we estimate that a staggering 82.9 million EPS spheres have the potential to be released into the environment from the 7.62 m3 of this material used for the construction of this coastal promenade, constituting a chronic source of pollution. Despite the ongoing construction, we have already evidenced mechanical fragmentation and dispersion of EPS microplastic pollution in the surrounding natural environment. To our knowledge, this is the first study that documents misused construction materials contributing to plastic pollution. In addition to the EPS pollution, our findings reveal an alarming accumulation of litter – an acute pollution source – including plastic cups, bottles, carrier bags, and several other construction materials (e.g. plastic nets, films) that are exacerbating the pollution problems within the region and potentially endangering marine and terrestrial organisms. These observations highlight the urgent need for mitigating measures and intervention policies targeting construction-related plastic and microplastic pollution, along with a more robust regulatory framework for construction activities as well as adequate surveillance and enforcement.
</details>
<br>
#### Exploring the microbiome of oral epithelial dysplasia as a predictor of malignant progression. 
[Link to paper](https://bmcoralhealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12903-023-02911-5) / [Link to preprint](https://www.researchsquare.com/article/rs-2129013/v1)<br>
**Wright, R.**, Pewarchuk, M., Marshall, E., Murray, B., Rosin, M., Laronde, D., Zhang, L., Lam, W., Langille, M. & Rock, L. (2023) *BMC Oral Health.*<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
A growing body of research associates the oral microbiome and oral cancer. Well-characterized clinical samples with outcome data are required to establish relevant associations between the microbiota and disease. The objective of this study was to characterize the community variations and the functional implications of the microbiome in low-grade oral epithelial dysplasia (OED) using 16S rRNA gene sequencing from annotated archival swabs in progressing (P) and non-progressing (NP) OED. We characterised the microbial community in 90 OED samples — 30 swabs from low-grade OED that progressed to cancer (cases) and 60 swabs from low-grade OED that did not progress after a minimum of 5 years of follow up (matched control subjects). There were small but significant differences between P and NP samples in terms of alpha diversity as well as beta diversity in conjunction with other clinical factors such as age and smoking status for both taxa and functional predictions. Across all samples, the most abundant genus was Streptococcus, followed by Haemophilus, Rothia, and Neisseria. Taxa and predicted functions were identified that were significantly differentially abundant with progression status (all Ps and NPs), when samples were grouped broadly by the number of years between sampling and progression or in specific time to progression for Ps only. However, these differentially abundant features were typically present only at low abundances. For example, Campylobacter was present in slightly higher abundance in Ps (1.72%) than NPs (1.41%) and this difference was significant when Ps were grouped by time to progression. Furthermore, several of the significantly differentially abundant functions were linked to the Campylobacteraceae family in Ps and may justify further investigation. Larger cohort studies to further explore the microbiome as a potential biomarker of risk in OED are warranted.
</details>
<br>
#### From defaults to databases: parameter and database choice dramatically impact the performance of metagenomic taxonomic classification tools.
**Wright, R.**, Comeau, A. & Langille, M. (2023) *Microb. Genom.* ([link to paper](https://www.microbiologyresearch.org/content/journal/mgen/10.1099/mgen.0.000949) / [link to preprint](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.04.27.489753v1))<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
In metagenomic analyses of microbiomes, one of the first steps is usually the taxonomic classification of reads by comparison to a database of previously taxonomically classified genomes. While different studies comparing metagenomic taxonomic classification methods have determined that different tools are ‘best’, there are two tools that have been used the most to-date: Kraken (k-mer-based classification against a user-constructed database) and MetaPhlAn (classification by alignment to clade-specific marker genes), the latest versions of which are Kraken2 and MetaPhlAn 3, respectively. We found large discrepancies in both the proportion of reads that were classified as well as the number of species that were identified when we used both Kraken2 and MetaPhlAn 3 to classify reads within metagenomes from human-associated or environmental datasets. We then investigated which of these tools would give classifications closest to the real composition of metagenomic samples using a range of simulated and mock samples and examined the combined impact of tool–parameter–database choice on the taxonomic classifications given. This revealed that there may not be a one-size-fits-all ‘best’ choice. While Kraken2 can achieve better overall performance, with higher precision, recall and F1 scores, as well as alpha- and beta-diversity measures closer to the known composition than MetaPhlAn 3, the computational resources required for this may be prohibitive for many researchers, and the default database and parameters should not be used. We therefore conclude that the best tool–parameter–database choice for a particular application depends on the scientific question of interest, which performance metric is most important for this question and the limit of available computational resources.
</details>
<br>
#### Microbial pioneers of plastic colonisation in coastal seawaters. 
[Link to paper](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2022.113701)<br>
Latva, M., Dedman, C., **Wright, R.**, Polin, M. & Christie-Oleza, J. (2022) *Mar. Poll. Bull.*<br>
**Contribution:** discussion of experimental and statistical methodologies, MiSeq library preparation and sequencing, supervision of data analysis, editing of the manuscript.<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
Plastics, when entering the environment, are immediately colonised by microorganisms. This modifies their physico-chemical properties as well as their transport and fate in natural ecosystems, but whom pioneers this colonisation in marine ecosystems? Previous studies have focused on microbial communities that develop on plastics after relatively long incubation periods (i.e., days to months), but very little data is available regarding the earliest stages of colonisation on buoyant plastics in marine waters (i.e., minutes or hours). We conducted a preliminary study where the earliest hours of microbial colonisation on buoyant plastics in marine coastal waters were investigated by field incubations and amplicon sequencing of the prokaryotic and eukaryotic communities. Our results show that members of the Bacteroidetes group pioneer microbial attachment to plastics but, over time, their presence is masked by other groups – Gammaproteobacteria at first and later by Alphaproteobacteria. Interestingly, the eukaryotic community on plastics exposed to sunlight became dominated by phototrophic organisms from the phylum Ochrophyta, diatoms at the start and brown algae towards the end of the three-day incubations. This study defines the pioneering microbial community that colonises plastics immediately when entering coastal marine environments and that may set the seeding Plastisphere of plastics in the oceans.
</details>
<br>
#### Microbiome differential abundance methods produce different results across 38 datasets. 
[Link to paper](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28034-z) / [Link to preprint](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.05.10.443486v1)<br>
Nearing, J., Douglas, G., Hayes, M., MacDonald, J., Desai, D., Allward, N., Jones, C., **Wright, R.**, Dhanani, A., Comeau, A. & Langille, M. (2022) *Nat. Comms.*<br>
**Contribution:** processed some of the datasets, contributed to decision-making on analyses and presentation of results, editing of the manuscript.<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
Identifying differentially abundant microbes is a common goal of microbiome studies. Multiple methods are used interchangeably for this purpose in the literature. Yet, there are few large-scale studies systematically exploring the appropriateness of using these tools interchangeably, and the scale and significance of the differences between them. Here, we compare the performance of 14 differential abundance testing methods on 38 16S rRNA gene datasets with two sample groups. We test for differences in amplicon sequence variants and operational taxonomic units (ASVs) between these groups. Our findings confirm that these tools identified drastically different numbers and sets of significant ASVs, and that results depend on data pre-processing. For many tools the number of features identified correlate with aspects of the data, such as sample size, sequencing depth, and effect size of community differences. ALDEx2 and ANCOM-II produce the most consistent results across studies and agree best with the intersect of results from different approaches. Nevertheless, we recommend that researchers should use a consensus approach based on multiple differential abundance methods to help ensure robust biological interpretations.
</details>
<br>
#### A multi-OMIC study of biodegradation and microbial community succession within the PET Plastisphere. 
[Link to paper](https://microbiomejournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40168-021-01054-5) / [Link to preprint](https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-104576/v1); [Link to conference abstract](https://doi.org/10.1099/acmi.ac2019.po0168)<br>
**Wright, R.**, Bosch, R., Langille, M., Gibson, M. & Christie-Oleza, J. (2021) *Microbiome.*<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
<b>Background</b><br>
Plastics now pollute marine environments across the globe. On entering these environments, plastics are rapidly colonised by a diverse community of microorganisms termed the plastisphere. Members of the plastisphere have a myriad of diverse functions typically found in any biofilm but, additionally, a number of marine plastisphere studies have claimed the presence of plastic-biodegrading organisms, although with little mechanistic verification. Here, we obtained a microbial community from marine plastic debris and analysed the community succession across 6 weeks of incubation with different polyethylene terephthalate (PET) products as the sole carbon source, and further characterised the mechanisms involved in PET degradation by two bacterial isolates from the plastisphere.<br>
<br>
<b>Results</b><br>
We found that all communities differed significantly from the inoculum and were dominated by Gammaproteobacteria, i.e. Alteromonadaceae and Thalassospiraceae at early time points, Alcanivoraceae at later time points and Vibrionaceae throughout. The large number of encoded enzymes involved in PET degradation found in predicted metagenomes and the observation of polymer oxidation by FTIR analyses both suggested PET degradation was occurring. However, we were unable to detect intermediates of PET hydrolysis with metabolomic analyses, which may be attributed to their rapid depletion by the complex community. To further confirm the PET biodegrading potential within the plastisphere of marine plastic debris, we used a combined proteogenomic and metabolomic approach to characterise amorphous PET degradation by two novel marine isolates, Thioclava sp. BHET1 and Bacillus sp. BHET2. The identification of PET hydrolytic intermediates by metabolomics confirmed that both isolates were able to degrade PET. High-throughput proteomics revealed that whilst Thioclava sp. BHET1 used the degradation pathway identified in terrestrial environment counterparts, these were absent in Bacillus sp. BHET2, indicating that either the enzymes used by this bacterium share little homology with those characterised previously, or that this bacterium uses a novel pathway for PET degradation.<br>
<br>
<b>Conclusions</b><br>
Overall, the results of our multi-OMIC characterisation of PET degradation provide a significant step forwards in our understanding of marine plastic degradation by bacterial isolates and communities and evidences the biodegrading potential extant in the plastisphere of marine plastic debris.<br>
</details>
<br>
#### Food or just a free ride? A meta-analysis reveals the global diversity of the Plastisphere.
[Link to paper](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-020-00814-9) (Editor's choice)<br>
**Wright, R.**, Langille, M. & Walker, T. (2021) *The ISME Journal.*<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
It is now indisputable that plastics are ubiquitous and problematic in ecosystems globally. Many suggestions have been made about the role that biofilms colonizing plastics in the environment—termed the “Plastisphere”—may play in the transportation and ecological impact of these plastics. By collecting and re-analyzing all raw 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metadata from 2,229 samples within 35 studies, we have performed the first meta-analysis of the Plastisphere in marine, freshwater, other aquatic (e.g., brackish or aquaculture) and terrestrial environments. We show that random forest models can be trained to differentiate between groupings of environmental factors as well as aspects of study design, but—crucially—also between plastics when compared with control biofilms and between different plastic types and community successional stages. Our meta-analysis confirms that potentially biodegrading Plastisphere members, the hydrocarbonoclastic Oceanospirillales and Alteromonadales are consistently more abundant in plastic than control biofilm samples across multiple studies and environments. This indicates the predilection of these organisms for plastics and confirms the urgent need for their ability to biodegrade plastics to be comprehensively tested. We also identified key knowledge gaps that should be addressed by future studies.
</details>
<br>
#### Damage repair versus aging in an individual-based model of biofilms.
[Link to paper](https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00018-20) / [Link to preprint](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.01.08.899740v1) / [Link to conference abstract](https://www.microbiologyresearch.org/content/journal/acmi/10.1099/acmi.ac2019.po0205)<br>
**Wright, R.**, Clegg, R., Coker, T. & Kreft, J-U. (2020) *mSystems.* <br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
The extent of senescence due to damage accumulation—or aging—is evidently evolvable as it differs hugely between species and is not universal, suggesting that its fitness advantages depend on life history and environment. In contrast, repair of damage is present in all organisms studied. Despite the fundamental trade-off between investing resources into repair or into growth, repair and segregation of damage have not always been considered alternatives. For unicellular organisms, unrepaired damage could be divided asymmetrically between daughter cells, leading to senescence of one and rejuvenation of the other. Repair of “unicells” has been predicted to be advantageous in well-mixed environments such as chemostats. Most microorganisms, however, live in spatially structured systems, such as biofilms, with gradients of environmental conditions and cellular physiology as well as a clonal population structure. To investigate whether this clonal structure might favor senescence by damage segregation (a division-of-labor strategy akin to the germline-soma division in multicellular organisms), we used an individual-based computational model and developed an adaptive repair strategy where cells respond to their current intracellular damage levels by investing into repair machinery accordingly. Our simulations showed that the new adaptive repair strategy was advantageous provided that growth was limited by substrate availability, which is typical for biofilms. Thus, biofilms do not favor a germline-soma-like division of labor between daughter cells in terms of damage segregation. We suggest that damage segregation is beneficial only when extrinsic mortality is high, a degree of multicellularity is present, and an active mechanism makes segregation effective.<br>
<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Damage is an inevitable consequence of life. For unicellular organisms, this leads to a trade-off between allocating resources into damage repair or into growth coupled with segregation of damage upon cell division, i.e., aging and senescence. Few studies considered repair as an alternative to senescence. None considered biofilms, where the majority of unicellular organisms live, although fitness advantages in well-mixed systems often turn into disadvantages in spatially structured systems such as biofilms. We compared the fitness consequences of aging versus an adaptive repair mechanism based on sensing damage, using an individual-based model of a generic unicellular organism growing in biofilms. We found that senescence is not beneficial provided that growth is limited by substrate availability. Instead, it is useful as a stress response to deal with damage that failed to be repaired when (i) extrinsic mortality was high; (ii) a degree of multicellularity was present; and (iii) damage segregation was effective.
</details>
<br>
#### Marine plastic debris – a new surface for microbial colonization. 
[Link to paper](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c02305) / [Link to journal cover](https://pubs.acs.org/toc/esthag/54/19)<br>
**Wright, R.***, Erni-Cassola, G.*, Zadjelovic, V., Latva, M. & Christie-Oleza, J. (2020) *Env. Sci. Technol.* <br>
* denotes equal contribution.<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
Plastics become rapidly colonized by microbes when released into marine environments. This microbial community—the Plastisphere—has recently sparked a multitude of scientific inquiries and generated a breadth of knowledge, which we bring together in this review. Besides providing a better understanding of community composition and biofilm development in marine ecosystems, we critically discuss current research on plastic biodegradation and the identification of potentially pathogenic “hitchhikers” in the Plastisphere. The Plastisphere is at the interface between the plastic and its surrounding milieu, and thus drives every interaction that this synthetic material has with its environment, from ecotoxicity and new links in marine food webs to the fate of the plastics in the water column. We conclude that research so far has not shown Plastisphere communities to starkly differ from microbial communities on other inert surfaces, which is particularly true for mature biofilm assemblages. Furthermore, despite progress that has been made in this field, we recognize that it is time to take research on plastic–Plastisphere–environment interactions a step further by identifying present gaps in our knowledge and offering our perspective on key aspects to be addressed by future studies: (I) better physical characterization of marine biofilms, (II) inclusion of relevant controls, (III) study of different successional stages, (IV) use of environmentally relevant concentrations of biofouled microplastics, and (V) prioritization of gaining a mechanistic and functional understanding of Plastisphere communities.
</details>
<br>
#### Plasticizer degradation by marine bacterial isolates: a proteogenomic and metabolomic characterization. 
[Link to paper](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.9b05228) / [Link to journal cover](https://pubs.acs.org/toc/esthag/54/4)<br>
**Wright, R.**, Bosch, R., Gibson, M. & Christie-Oleza, J. (2020) *Env. Sci. Technol.* <br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
Many commercial plasticizers are toxic endocrine-disrupting chemicals that are added to plastics during manufacturing and may leach out once they reach the environment. Traditional phthalic acid ester plasticizers (PAEs), such as dibutyl phthalate (DBP) and bis(2-ethyl hexyl) phthalate (DEHP), are now increasingly being replaced with more environmentally friendly alternatives, such as acetyl tributyl citrate (ATBC). While the metabolic pathways for PAE degradation have been established in the terrestrial environment, to our knowledge, the mechanisms for ATBC biodegradation have not been identified previously and plasticizer degradation in the marine environment remains underexplored. From marine plastic debris, we enriched and isolated microbes able to grow using a range of plasticizers and, for the first time, identified the pathways used by two phylogenetically distinct bacteria to degrade three different plasticizers (i.e., DBP, DEHP, and ATBC) via a comprehensive proteogenomic and metabolomic approach. This integrated multi-OMIC study also revealed the different mechanisms used for ester side-chain removal from the different plasticizers (esterases and enzymes involved in the β-oxidation pathway) as well as the molecular response to deal with toxic intermediates, that is, phthalate, and the lower biodegrading potential detected for ATBC than for PAE plasticizers. This study highlights the metabolic potential that exists in the biofilms that colonize plastics—the Plastisphere—to effectively biodegrade plastic additives and flags the inherent importance of microbes in reducing plastic toxicity in the environment.
</details>
<br>
#### Early colonization of weathered polyethylene by distinct bacteria in marine coastal seawater. 
[Link to paper](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00248-019-01424-5)<br>
Erni-Cassola, G., **Wright, R.**, Gibson, M. & Christie-Oleza, J. (2019) *Microb. Ecol.* <br>
**Contribution:** discussion of experimental and statistical methodologies, MiSeq library preparation and sequencing, editing of the manuscript.<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
Plastic debris in aquatic environments is rapidly colonized by a diverse community of microorganisms, often referred to as the “Plastisphere.” Given that common plastics are derived from fossil fuels, one would expect that Plastispheres should be enriched with obligate hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria (OHCB). So far, though, different polymer types do not seem to exert a strong effect on determining the composition of the Plastisphere, and putative biodegrading bacteria are only found as rare taxa within these biofilms. Here, we show through 16S rRNA gene sequencing that the enrichment of a prominent OHCB member on weathered and non-weathered polyethylene only occurred at early stages of colonization (i.e., after 2 days of incubation in coastal marine water; 5.8% and 3.7% of relative abundance, respectively, vs. 0.6% on glass controls). As biofilms matured, these bacteria decreased in relative abundance on all materials (< 0.3% after 9 days). Apart from OHCB, weathered polyethylene strongly enriched for other distinct organisms during early stages of colonization, such as a specific member of the Roseobacter group and a member of the genus Aestuariibacter (median 26.9% and 1.8% of the community, respectively), possibly as a consequence of the availability of short-oxidized chains generated from weathering. Our results demonstrate that Plastispheres can vary in accordance with the weathering state of the material and that very early colonizing communities are enriched with taxa that can potentially degrade hydrocarbons. Given the lack of persistent enrichment and overall community convergence between materials over time, common non-hydrolysable polymers might not serve as an important source of carbon for mature Plastispheres once the labile substrates generated from weathering have been depleted.
</details>
<br>
#### Understanding microbial community dynamics to improve optimal microbiome selection.
[Link to paper](https://microbiomejournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40168-019-0702-x) / [Link to preprint](https://doi.org/10.1101/474742)<br>
**Wright, R.**, Gibson, M. & Christie-Oleza, J. (2019) *Microbiome.* <br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
<b>Background</b><br>
Artificial selection of microbial communities that perform better at a desired process has seduced scientists for over a decade, but the method has not been systematically optimised nor the mechanisms behind its success, or failure, determined. Microbial communities are highly dynamic and, hence, go through distinct and rapid stages of community succession, but the consequent effect this may have on artificially selected communities is unknown.<br>
<br>
<b>Results</b><br>
Using chitin as a case study, we successfully selected for microbial communities with enhanced chitinase activities but found that continuous optimisation of incubation times between selective transfers was of utmost importance. The analysis of the community composition over the entire selection process revealed fundamental aspects in microbial ecology: when incubation times between transfers were optimal, the system was dominated by Gammaproteobacteria (i.e. main bearers of chitinase enzymes and drivers of chitin degradation), before being succeeded by cheating, cross-feeding and grazing organisms.<br>
<br>
<b>Conclusions</b><br>
The selection of microbiomes to enhance a desired process is widely used, though the success of artificially selecting microbial communities appears to require optimal incubation times in order to avoid the loss of the desired trait as a consequence of an inevitable community succession. A comprehensive understanding of microbial community dynamics will improve the success of future community selection studies.<br>
</details>
<br>
# PREPRINTS

#### Lime amendment to chronically acidified forest soils results in shifts in microbial communities.
[Link to preprint](https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-3876773/v1)<br>
Hosmer, M.*, **Wright, R.***, McCavour, C., Keys, K., Langille, M., Sterling, S. & Rohde, J. <br>
* denotes equal contribution. <br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
A consequence of past acid rain events has been chronic acidification of both Nova Scotian forests and watersheds, leading to a loss of essential nutrients and subsequently to decreased forest productivity and biodiversity. Liming – supplementing forests with crushed rock (dolomite, limestone, or basalt) – can restore essential nutrients to acidified soils as well as increasing the pH of the soils and the carbon capture by forests by promotion of tree growth. The effectiveness of liming treatments have often been assessed biologically through tree growth measurements, but microorganisms respond rapidly to changes in pH and nutrient availability, and would potentially provide early insights into forest recovery. However, the impact of liming on the soil microbiome is not well understood; understanding the impacts of liming on a micro as well as a macro level will help to determine whether liming is a good remediation strategy for Nova Scotia. A pilot study evaluating liming in acidified forests in Nova Scotia began in 2017. Microbiome analyses (prokaryotic 16S rRNA and fungal ITS2 gene amplicon sequencing) of three different depths (horizons) of soil show significant differences between lime-treated and control soils for the prokaryotic but not fungal communities, particularly in the uppermost soil horizon sampled. Notably, several genera, particularly from the Bacteroidia class, were significantly more abundant in treated than control soils in both upper soil horizons. The impacts of liming treatment were smaller in the deepest soil horizon sampled, suggesting that lime amendment either takes longer to reach these depths, or has little impact on these microbial communities. Future studies that investigate the functional capacity of these microbial communities and longitudinal follow-ups are warranted.
</details>
<br>
# BOOK CHAPTERS

#### Current research on microbe-plastic interactions in the marine environment. 
*In: Plastic Pollution in the Global Oceans.*
[Link to chapter](https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811259111_0011) / [Link to preprint](https://www.preprints.org/manuscript/202107.0273/v1)<br>
Latva, M., Zadjelovic, V. & **Wright, R.** (2023) Ed. Horton, A. <br>
**Contribution:** senior author; planned and coordinated the review, carried out reviews of scientific literature and other reviews, analysed data/produced figures, writing and editing of the manuscript.<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
The microbial colonisers of plastics – the ‘plastisphere’ – can affect all interactions that plastics have with their surrounding environments. While only specifically characterised within the last 10 years, at the beginning of 2021 there were 140 primary research and 65 review articles that investigate at least one aspect of the plastisphere. We gathered information on the locations and methodologies used by each of the primary research articles, highlighting several aspects of plastisphere research that remain understudied: (i) the non-bacterial plastisphere constituents; (ii) the mechanisms used to degrade plastics by marine isolates or communities; (iii) the capacity for plastisphere members to be pathogenic or carry antimicrobial resistance genes; and (iv) meta-OMIC characterisations of the plastisphere. We have also summarised the topics covered by the existing plastisphere review articles, identifying areas that have received less attention to date – most of which are in line with the areas that have fewer primary research articles. Therefore, in addition to providing an overview of some fundamental topics such as biodegradation and community assembly, we discuss the importance of eukaryotes in shaping the plastisphere, potential pathogens carried by plastics and the impact of the plastisphere on plastic transport and biogeochemical cycling. Finally, we summarise the future directions suggested by the reviews that we have evaluated and suggest other key research questions.
</details>
<br>
#### Contaminants, Pollution and Potential Anthropogenic Impacts in Chagos/BIOT.
[Link to chapter](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-94-007-5965-7_21)<br>
*In: Coral Reefs of the United Kingdom Overseas Territories.*<br>
Readman, J., […11 other authors in alphabetical order…], **Wright, R.** & Sheppard, C. (2013) <br>
**Contribution:** carried out manual sorting of sediment samples for potential plastic pieces and performed FTIR spectroscopy on all potential plastics for identification and wrote up the results for this section.<br>
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
A broad range of chemical contaminants and pollutants have been measured within the Chagos Archipelago. Contamination is amongst the lowest in the world. Whilst much data is in the open literature, the chapter also includes details of extensive pollution monitoring for the atoll Diego Garcia which hosts a military facility. Hydrocarbons present are primarily of a natural origin with negligible evidence of contamination from petroleum or combustion origins. Tar balls, however, have been reported on several beaches in the Archipelago. Analyses of faecal steroids provide negligible evidence of sewage contamination. ‘Persistent organic pollutants’ (POPs), including PCBs and pesticides, were generally below analytical detection limits, as were polyfluorinated compounds, brominated, chlorinated and organo-phosphorous flame retardants, fluorinated tensides, and surfactants (PFOS). Antifouling biocides and herbicides in Diego Garcia show negligible contamination. Metal concentrations are very low. Levels of most contaminants are typically comparable to those recorded in environments perceived to be pristine, for example, the Antarctic. In Diego Garcia, extensive monitoring includes regular analyses in accredited US laboratories of over one hundred metals and organic contaminants. Results generally reveal concentrations below detection limits. This is in agreement with the open literature surveys. These legislated assessments are designed to ensure both environmental and human health preservation. Whilst many detection limits are higher than those of the independent surveys, they generally confirm the pristine nature of the Archipelago. Beach surveys, however, revealed a surprisingly high number of pieces of debris throughout the Archipelago, mainly plastics of South East Asian origin. The number of litter pieces in Diego Garcia was less than in the other atolls, reductions being attributed to beach clean-up events. Microplastic contamination is shown to be both widespread and relatively high compared to other locations on a global scale, and there were significantly more microplastics at uninhabited atolls compared to the Diego Garcia, showing the potential for microplastics to accumulate in remote locations. Holothurian (sea cucumber) poaching has been another significant environmental pressure on the coral reefs of Chagos and is included in this review, in view of the reported ecological benefits of the group to reef health and resilience.
</details>
<br>
# COMMISSIONED SCIENTIFIC ARTICLES

#### The global diversity of the plastisphere
[Link to magazine](https://sfam.org.uk/knowledge/microbiologist-magazine.html)<br>
**Wright, R.** (2021)  (magazine article for the March 2021 issue of Society for applied Microbiology’s The Microbiologist magazine)<br>

#### The PET-biodegrading potential of the Plastisphere
[Link to article](https://microbiologysociety.org/our-work/75th-anniversary-a-sustainable-future/circular-economy/circular-economy-case-studies/the-pet-biodegrading-potential-of-the-plastisphere.html)<br>
**Wright, R.** (2020) (blog post as part of the Microbiology Society’s “A sustainable future” project)<br>

#### Marine bacteria and the plastisphere. 
**Wright, R.** (2019) *Biological Sciences Review* (article for educational magazine aimed at 16-18 year-old biology students)

